		THE THREE MUSKETEERS


This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online at
http://ww.gutenberg.org/license. If you are not located in the United
States, you’ll have to check the laws of the country where you are
located before using this ebook.


Title: The Three Musketeers
Author: Alexandre Dumas, Pere
Release Date: March 01, 1998 [EBook #1257]
Reposted: November 27, 2016 [corrections made]
Language: English
Character set encoding: UTF-8


** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE THREE MUSKETEERS, BY
ALEXANDRE DUMAS, PERE **


Produced by John P. Roberts II, Roger Labbe, Scott David Gray, Sue
Asscher, Anita Martin, David Muller and David Widger.


  *THE THREE MUSKETEERS*

  _By_

  *Alexandre Dumas, Pere*

  _First Volume of the d’Artagnan Series_



CONTENTS


  AUTHOR’S PREFACE
  1 THE THREE PRESENTS OF D’ARTAGNAN THE ELDER
  2 THE ANTECHAMBER OF M. DE TREVILLE
  3 THE AUDIENCE
  4 THE SHOULDER OF ATHOS, THE BALDRIC OF PORTHOS AND THE HANDKERCHIEF
  OF ARAMIS
  5 THE KING’S MUSKETEERS AND THE CARDINAL’S GUARDS
  6 HIS MAJESTY KING LOUIS XII
  7 THE INTERIOR* OF THE MUSKETEERS
  8 CONCERNING A COURT INTRIGUE
  9 D’ARTAGNAN SHOWS HIMSELF
  10 A MOUSETRAP IN THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY
  11 IN WHICH THE PLOT THICKENS
  12 GEORGE VILLIERS, DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM
  13 MONSIEUR BONACIEUX
  14 THE MAN OF MEUNG
  15 MEN OF THE ROBE AND MEN OF THE SWORD
  16 IN WHICH M. SEGUIER, KEEPER OF THE SEALS, LOOKS MORE THAN ONCE
  FOR THE BELL
  17 BONACIEUX AT HOME
  18 LOVER AND HUSBAND
  19 PLAN OF CAMPAIGN
  20 THE JOURNEY
  21 THE COUNTESS DE WINTER
  22 THE BALLET OF LA MERLAISON
  23 THE RENDEZVOUS
  24 THE PAVILION
  25 PORTHOS
  26 ARAMIS AND HIS THESIS
  27 THE WIFE OF ATHOS
  28 THE RETURN
  29 HUNTING FOR THE EQUIPMENTS
  30 D’ARTAGNAN AND THE ENGLISHMAN
  31 ENGLISH AND FRENCH
  32 A PROCURATOR’S DINNER
  33 SOUBRETTE AND MISTRESS
  34 IN WHICH THE EQUIPMENT OF ARAMIS AND PORTHOS IS TREATED OF
  35 A GASCON A MATCH FOR CUPID
  36 DREAM OF VENGEANCE
  37 MILADY’S SECRET
  38 HOW, WITHOUT INCOMMDING HIMSELF, ATHOS PROCURES HIS EQUIPMENT
  39 A VISION
  40 A TERRIBLE VISION
  41 THE SEIGE OF LA ROCHELLE
  42 THE ANJOU WINE
  43 THE SIGN OF THE RED DOVECOT
  44 THE UTILITY OF STOVEPIPES
  45 A CONJUGAL SCENE
  46 THE BASTION SAINT-GERVAIS
  47 THE COUNCIL OF THE MUSKETEERS
  48 A FAMILY AFFAIR
  49 FATALITY
  50 CHAT BETWEEN BROTHER AND SISTER
  51 OFFICER
  52 CAPTIVITY: THE FIRST DAY
  53 CAPTIVITY: THE SECOND DAY
  54 CAPTIVITY: THE THIRD DAY
  55 CAPTIVITY: THE FOURTH DAY
  56 CAPTIVITY: THE FIFTH DAY
  57 MEANS FOR CLASSICAL TRAGEDY
  58 ESCAPE
  59 WHAT TOOK PLACE AT PORTSMOUTH AUGUST 23, 1628
  60 IN FRANCE
  61 THE CARMELITE CONVENT AT BETHUNE
  62 TWO VARIETIES OF DEMONS
  63 THE DROP OF WATER
  64 THE MAN IN THE RED CLOAK
  65 TRIAL
  66 EXECUTION
  67 CONCLUSION
  EPILOGUE




AUTHOR’S PREFACE


In which it is proved that, notwithstanding their names’ ending in OS
and IS, the heroes of the story which we are about to have the honor to
relate to our readers have nothing mythological about them.

A short time ago, while making researches in the Royal Library for my
History of Louis XIV, I stumbled by chance upon the Memoirs of M.
d’Artagnan, printed--as were most of the works of that period, in which
authors could not tell the truth without the risk of a residence, more
or less long, in the Bastille--at Amsterdam, by Pierre Rouge. The title
attracted me; I took them home with me, with the permission of the
guardian, and devoured them.

It is not my intention here to enter into an analysis of this curious
work; and I shall satisfy myself with referring such of my readers as
appreciate the pictures of the period to its pages. They will therein
find portraits penciled by the hand of a master; and although these
squibs may be, for the most part, traced upon the doors of barracks and
the walls of cabarets, they will not find the likenesses of Louis XII,
Anne of Austria, Richelieu, Mazarin, and the courtiers of the period,
less faithful than in the history of M. Anquetil.

But, it is well known, what strikes the capricious mind of the poet is
not always what affects the mass of readers. Now, while admiring, as
others doubtless will admire, the details we have to relate, our main
preoccupation concerned a matter to which no one before ourselves had
given a thought.

D’Artagnan relates that on his first visit to M. de Treville, captain of
the king’s Musketeers, he met in the antechamber three young men,
serving in the illustrious corps into which he was soliciting the honor
of being received, bearing the names of Athos, Porthos, and Aramis.

We must confess these three strange names struck us; and it immediately
occurred to us that they were but pseudonyms, under which d’Artagnan had
disguised names perhaps illustrious, or else that the bearers of these
borrowed names had themselves chosen them on the day in which, from
caprice, discontent, or want of fortune, they had donned the simple
Musketeer’s uniform.

From that moment we had no rest till we could find some trace in
contemporary works of these extraordinary names which had so strongly
awakened our curiosity.

The catalogue alone of the books we read with this object would fill a
whole chapter, which, although it might be very instructive, would
certainly afford our readers but little amusement. It will suffice,
then, to tell them that at the moment at which, discouraged by so many
fruitless investigations, we were about to abandon our search, we at
length found, guided by the counsels of our illustrious friend Paulin
Paris, a manuscript in folio, endorsed 4772 or 4773, we do not recollect
which, having for title, “Memoirs of the Comte de la Fere, Touching Some
Events Which Passed in France Toward the End of the Reign of King Louis
XII and the Commencement of the Reign of King Louis XIV.”

It may be easily imagined how great was our joy when, in turning over
this manuscript, our last hope, we found at the twentieth page the name
of Athos, at the twenty-seventh the name of Porthos, and at the
thirty-first the name of Aramis.

The discovery of a completely unknown manuscript at a period in which
historical science is carried to such a high degree appeared almost
miraculous. We hastened, therefore, to obtain permission to print it,
with the view of presenting ourselves someday with the pack of others at
the doors of the Academie des Inscriptions et Belles Lettres, if we
should not succeed--a very probable thing, by the by--in gaining
admission to the Academie Francaise with our own proper pack. This
permission, we feel bound to say, was graciously granted; which compels
us here to give a public contradiction to the slanderers who pretend
that we live under a government but moderately indulgent to men of
letters.

Now, this is the first part of this precious manuscript which we offer
to our readers, restoring it to the title which belongs to it, and
entering into an engagement that if (of which we have no doubt) this
first part should obtain the success it merits, we will publish the
second immediately.

In the meanwhile, as the godfather is a second father, we beg the reader
to lay to our account, and not to that of the Comte de la Fere, the
pleasure or the ENNUI he may experience.

This being understood, let us proceed with our history.




1 THE THREE PRESENTS OF D’ARTAGNAN THE ELDER


On the first Monday of the month of April, 1625, the market town of
Meung, in which the author of ROMANCE OF THE ROSE was born, appeared to
be in as perfect a state of revolution as if the Huguenots had just made
a second La Rochelle of it. Many citizens, seeing the women flying
toward the High Street, leaving their children crying at the open doors,
hastened to don the cuirass, and supporting their somewhat uncertain
courage with a musket or a partisan, directed their steps toward the
hostelry of the Jolly Miller, before which was gathered, increasing
every minute, a compact group, vociferous and full of curiosity.

In those times panics were common, and few days passed without some city
or other registering in its archives an event of this kind. There were
nobles, who made war against each other; there was the king, who made
war against the cardinal; there was Spain, which made war against the
king. Then, in addition to these concealed or public, secret or open
wars, there were robbers, mendicants, Huguenots, wolves, and scoundrels,
who made war upon everybody. The citizens always took up arms readily
against thieves, wolves or scoundrels, often against nobles or
Huguenots, sometimes against the king, but never against the cardinal or
Spain. It resulted, then, from this habit that on the said first Monday
of April, 1625, the citizens, on hearing the clamor, and seeing neither
the red-and-yellow standard nor the livery of the Duc de Richelieu,
rushed toward the hostel of the Jolly Miller. When arrived there, the
cause of the hubbub was apparent to all.

A young man--we can sketch his portrait at a dash. Imagine to yourself a
Don Quixote of eighteen; a Don Quixote without his corselet, without his
coat of mail, without his cuisses; a Don Quixote clothed in a woolen
doublet, the blue color of which had faded into a nameless shade between
lees of wine and a heavenly azure; face long and brown; high cheek
bones, a sign of sagacity; the maxillary muscles enormously developed,
an infallible sign by which a Gascon may always be detected, even
without his cap--and our young man wore a cap set off with a sort of
feather; the eye open and intelligent; the nose hooked, but finely
chiseled. Too big for a youth, too small for a grown man, an experienced
eye might have taken him for a farmer’s son upon a journey had it not
been for the long sword which, dangling from a leather baldric, hit
against the calves of its owner as he walked, and against the rough side
of his steed when he was on horseback.

For our young man had a steed which was the observed of all observers.
It was a Bearn pony, from twelve to fourteen years old, yellow in his
hide, without a hair in his tail, but not without windgalls on his legs,
which, though going with his head lower than his knees, rendering a
martingale quite unnecessary, contrived nevertheless to perform his
eight leagues a day. Unfortunately, the qualities of this horse were so
well concealed under his strange-colored hide and his unaccountable
gait, that at a time when everybody was a connoisseur in horseflesh, the
appearance of the aforesaid pony at Meung--which place he had entered
about a quarter of an hour before, by the gate of Beaugency--produced an
unfavorable feeling, which extended to his rider.

And this feeling had been more painfully perceived by young
d’Artagnan--for so was the Don Quixote of this second Rosinante
named--from his not being able to conceal from himself the ridiculous
appearance that such a steed gave him, good horseman as he was. He had
sighed deeply, therefore, when accepting the gift of the pony from M.
d’Artagnan the elder. He was not ignorant that such a beast was worth at
least twenty livres; and the words which had accompanied the present
were above all price.

“My son,” said the old Gascon gentleman, in that pure Bearn PATOIS of
which Henry IV could never rid himself, “this horse was born in the
house of your father about thirteen years ago, and has remained in it
ever since, which ought to make you love it. Never sell it; allow it to
die tranquilly and honorably of old age, and if you make a campaign with
it, take as much care of it as you would of an old servant. At court,
provided you have ever the honor to go there,” continued M. d’Artagnan
the elder, “--an honor to which, remember, your ancient nobility gives
you the right--sustain worthily your name of gentleman, which has been
worthily borne by your ancestors for five hundred years, both for your
own sake and the sake of those who belong to you. By the latter I mean
your relatives and friends. Endure nothing from anyone except Monsieur
the Cardinal and the king. It is by his courage, please observe, by his
courage alone, that a gentleman can make his way nowadays. Whoever
hesitates for a second perhaps allows the bait to escape which during
that exact second fortune held out to him. You are young. You ought to
be brave for two reasons: the first is that you are a Gascon, and the
second is that you are my son. Never fear quarrels, but seek adventures.
I have taught you how to handle a sword; you have thews of iron, a wrist
of steel. Fight on all occasions. Fight the more for duels being
forbidden, since consequently there is twice as much courage in
fighting. I have nothing to give you, my son, but fifteen crowns, my
horse, and the counsels you have just heard. Your mother will add to
them a recipe for a certain balsam, which she had from a Bohemian and
which has the miraculous virtue of curing all wounds that do not reach
the heart. Take advantage of all, and live happily and long. I have but
one word to add, and that is to propose an example to you--not mine, for
I myself have never appeared at court, and have only taken part in
religious wars as a volunteer; I speak of Monsieur de Treville, who was
formerly my neighbor, and who had the honor to be, as a child, the
play-fellow of our king, Louis XII, whom God preserve! Sometimes their
play degenerated into battles, and in these battles the king was not
always the stronger. The blows which he received increased greatly his
esteem and friendship for Monsieur de Treville. Afterward, Monsieur de
Treville fought with others: in his first journey to Paris, five times;
from the death of the late king till the young one came of age, without
reckoning wars and sieges, seven times; and from that date up to the
present day, a hundred times, perhaps! So that in spite of edicts,
ordinances, and decrees, there he is, captain of the Musketeers; that is
to say, chief of a legion of Caesars, whom the king holds in great
esteem and whom the cardinal dreads--he who dreads nothing, as it is
said. Still further, Monsieur de Treville gains ten thousand crowns a
year; he is therefore a great noble. He began as you begin. Go to him
with this letter, and make him your model in order that you may do as he
has done.”

Upon which M. d’Artagnan the elder girded his own sword round his son,
kissed him tenderly on both cheeks, and gave him his benediction.

On leaving the paternal chamber, the young man found his mother, who was
waiting for him with the famous recipe of which the counsels we have
just repeated would necessitate frequent employment. The adieux were on
this side longer and more tender than they had been on the other--not
that M. d’Artagnan did not love his son, who was his only offspring, but
M. d’Artagnan was a man, and he would have considered it unworthy of a
man to give way to his feelings; whereas Mme. d’Artagnan was a woman,
and still more, a mother. She wept abundantly; and--let us speak it to
the praise of M. d’Artagnan the younger--notwithstanding the efforts he
made to remain firm, as a future Musketeer ought, nature prevailed, and
he shed many tears, of which he succeeded with great difficulty in
concealing the half.

The same day the young man set forward on his journey, furnished with
the three paternal gifts, which consisted, as we have said, of fifteen
crowns, the horse, and the letter for M. de Treville--the counsels being
thrown into the bargain.

With such a VADE MECUM d’Artagnan was morally and physically an exact
copy of the hero of Cervantes, to whom we so happily compared him when
our duty of an historian placed us under the necessity of sketching his
portrait. Don Quixote took windmills for giants, and sheep for armies;
d’Artagnan took every smile for an insult, and every look as a
provocation--whence it resulted that from Tarbes to Meung his fist was
constantly doubled, or his hand on the hilt of his sword; and yet the
fist did not descend upon any jaw, nor did the sword issue from its
scabbard. It was not that the sight of the wretched pony did not excite
numerous smiles on the countenances of passers-by; but as against the
side of this pony rattled a sword of respectable length, and as over
this sword gleamed an eye rather ferocious than haughty, these
passers-by repressed their hilarity, or if hilarity prevailed over
prudence, they endeavored to laugh only on one side, like the masks of
the ancients. D’Artagnan, then, remained majestic and intact in his
susceptibility, till he came to this unlucky city of Meung.

But there, as he was alighting from his horse at the gate of the Jolly
Miller, without anyone--host, waiter, or hostler--coming to hold his
stirrup or take his horse, d’Artagnan spied, though an open window on
the ground floor, a gentleman, well-made and of good carriage, although
of rather a stern countenance, talking with two persons who appeared to
listen to him with respect. D’Artagnan fancied quite naturally,
according to his custom, that he must be the object of their
conversation, and listened. This time d’Artagnan was only in part
mistaken; he himself was not in question, but his horse was. The
gentleman appeared to be enumerating all his qualities to his auditors;
and, as I have said, the auditors seeming to have great deference for
the narrator, they every moment burst into fits of laughter. Now, as a
half-smile was sufficient to awaken the irascibility of the young man,
the effect produced upon him by this vociferous mirth may be easily
imagined.

Nevertheless, d’Artagnan was desirous of examining the appearance of
this impertinent personage who ridiculed him. He fixed his haughty eye
upon the stranger, and perceived a man of from forty to forty-five years
of age, with black and piercing eyes, pale complexion, a strongly marked
nose, and a black and well-shaped mustache. He was dressed in a doublet
and hose of a violet color, with aiguillettes of the same color, without
any other ornaments than the customary slashes, through which the shirt
appeared. This doublet and hose, though new, were creased, like
traveling clothes for a long time packed in a portmanteau. D’Artagnan
made all these remarks with the rapidity of a most minute observer, and
doubtless from an instinctive feeling that this stranger was destined to
have a great influence over his future life.

Now, as at the moment in which d’Artagnan fixed his eyes upon the
gentleman in the violet doublet, the gentleman made one of his most
knowing and profound remarks respecting the Bearnese pony, his two
auditors laughed even louder than before, and he himself, though
contrary to his custom, allowed a pale smile (if I may be allowed to use
such an expression) to stray over his countenance. This time there could
be no doubt; d’Artagnan was really insulted. Full, then, of this
conviction, he pulled his cap down over his eyes, and endeavoring to
copy some of the court airs he had picked up in Gascony among young
traveling nobles, he advanced with one hand on the hilt of his sword and
the other resting on his hip. Unfortunately, as he advanced, his anger
increased at every step; and instead of the proper and lofty speech he
had prepared as a prelude to his challenge, he found nothing at the tip
of his tongue but a gross personality, which he accompanied with a
furious gesture.

“I say, sir, you sir, who are hiding yourself behind that shutter--yes,
you, sir, tell me what you are laughing at, and we will laugh together!”

The gentleman raised his eyes slowly from the nag to his cavalier, as if
he required some time to ascertain whether it could be to him that such
strange reproaches were addressed; then, when he could not possibly
entertain any doubt of the matter, his eyebrows slightly bent,